Unreal Tournament 2004 DEMO Release notes.
Developed by	: Epic Games Digital Extremes
Distributed by	: Atari
Please note that due to the pre-release nature of the product the 
demo can't be supported by Atari technical support.
0 Special information about the UT2004 Demo
0.1  Reporting bugs and suggestions
0.2  Features of the demo compared to the full version
1  System Requirements
1.1  Minimum System Requirements
1.2  Recommended System Requirements
2  Performance
2.1  Resolution
2.2  CPU speed
2.3  Memory
2.4  Considering upgrading?
2.5  Getting better performance
3  Troubleshooting
3.1  Crashes
3.2  Sound issues
3.3  Network play issues
3.4  Control issues
3.5  Direct3D
3.6  TNT2/ Kyro II/ Voodoo 3 issues
3.7  OpenGL
3.8  DirectX 9,0b
3.9  Game is starting up windowed
3.10 Software rendering
4  Dedicated Network Servers
4.1  Explanation
4.2  Launching
4.3  Multiple server per machine
5  Online Stats Tracking - UT2004stats
5.1  Overview
5.2  Turning on *your* Stats Tracking
6  Useful Web Links
7  Copyright Notice
0 Special Information about the UT2004 Demo
This is the Unreal Tournament 2004 demo version.As of this release,
we're a few weeks away from shipping the final game.Therefore,
some features aren't finalized, and some gameplay tweaks remain.
0.1 Reporting bugs and suggestions
We welcome bug reports and gameplay suggestions for the demo. 
Please send all feedback to:
ut2004bugs@epicgames.com
The team can't reply to messages individually, be we do take the
feedback into consideration. 
0.2 Features of the demo compared to the full version
The full game differs in the following ways compared to this demo:
Textures in the full game are, on average, 2X higher resolution
than in the demo.  The textures in the demo were reduced because
of download size limitations.
The full game includes over 100 maps, compared to the 5 in the demo.
The full game includes over 80 characters, versus 4 in the demo.
The demo only supports "instant action" mode, Internet and LAN play.
The full version also contains the new single-player ladder, enabling you 
to play through the game while managing a team roster.
The demo doesn't include the Unreal editor and content-creation tools
which ship with the final game, enabling you to build new levels, modify
existing ones, and create game mods.
The demo doesn't include any mutators, but the full version includes 
over 20 mutators offering new variations on gameplay.
1 System Requirements
1.1 Minimum System Requirements
Operating System:Windows 98/Me/2000/XP
Processor:Pentium III or AMD Athlon 1.0 GHz processor
Memory:128 MByte RAM
Hard Disk Space:300 MByte free
Video:32 MB Windows compatible video card*
Sound:Windows compatible sound card. NVIDIA nForce or 
other motherboards/soundcards containing the Dolby 
Digital Interactive Content Encoder required for 
Dolby Digital audio.*
DirectX:DirectX version 9.0b or higher
DirectX is not required for using the software
renderer  
Modem:33.6K baud (for modem/Internet play)
InternetTCP/IP) and LAN (TCP/IP) play supported.
1.2 Recommended System Requirements
Operating System:Windows 98/Me/2000/XP 
Processor:Pentium III or AMD Athlon 1.2 GHz processor
Memory:256 MByte RAM
Hard Disk Space:500 MByte free 
300 MByte for game, 200 MByte swap)
Video:NVIDIA GeForce 2 or ATI Radeon Hardware T&L card with
64 MB VRAM recommended
Sound:Sound Blaster Audigy 2 ZS
DirectX:DirectX version 9.0b or higher
Modem:Broadband Internet connection
InternetTCP/IP) and LAN (TCP/IP) play supported.
* Indicates device should be compatible with DirectX, version 9.0b or
higher.
2 Performance
2.1 Resolution
The resolution in which you run the game will have the greatest impact on 
performance if you are not in the lucky position of running the latest 
top of the line graphics cards. Running at 640x480 in 16 bit mode or even 
512x384 in 16 bit mode should provide decent performance even on older 
hardware.
2.2 CPU Speed
The game is also very sensitive to CPU speed, memory bandwidth, and cache
performance. Thus, it runs far better on leading-edge processors like
those of AMD and Intel. See section 1.2 for a guideline on recommended 
specs.
2.3 Memory
Unreal Tournament 2004's performance is highly dependent on the amount
of RAM you have in your machine, and the amount of memory that is
available. Machines with less memory will access their hard disk more
frequently to load data, which causes sporadic pauses in gameplay. Thus,
if you have a 128 MByteor less) machine, you should make sure that
you don't have other unnecessary programs loaded in memory when playing
Unreal Tournament 2004.
2.4 Considering upgrading?
For people considering upgrading their machines, here are some tips based
on our experience running Unreal Tournament 2004 on a variety of
machines:
1 The biggest performance gain in Unreal Tournament 2004 comes from
having a state of the art graphics chip.
2 The next upgrade that tends to improve Unreal Tournament 2004 
performance is upgrading your CPU.
3 Finally, lots of RAM helps. With memory prices continually falling,
it's now reasonably affordable to upgrade to 512 MByte of system
memory.
2.5 Getting better performance
By default Unreal Tournament 2004 picks hardware specific default
values the first time you run the game which should result in decent
performance but there is always room left to tweak.
Resolution and texture detail levels have the greatest impact on 
performance, if you have a fast CPU. So you might want to tweak the 
settings to achieve the visual quality performance tradeoff you 
desire.
If you have a fast graphics card, but a rather slow CPU you might want
to lower the World detail setting in the detail settings menu.
Last but not least, if you have both a fast CPU and a fast graphics
card you shouldn't have to read this).
3 Troubleshooting
3.1 Crashes
If Unreal Tournament 2004 stops with aRan out of virtual memory"
message, you need to free up more hard disk space on your primary drive
(C:) in order to play. Unreal Tournament 2004's large levels and rich
textures take up a lot of virtual memory.We recommend having 500 MByte 
of free hard disk space for running the demo.
3.2 Sound issues
If using a 3D sound accelerator such as the Sound Blaster Audigy series 
sound card, you can go intoOptions/Audio" to enable EAX by selecting
theHardware 3D Sound + EAX" options.
You need to upgrade to the latest version of Sound Blaster Audigy drivers 
in order to get acceptable 3D sound performance.
Using Unreal Tournament 2004 in conjunction with earlier versions of the
drivers MAY cause severe performance problemsmajor slowdowns in the
order of 30-50% while playing sound) in which case you should change the
option back to the defaultSoftware 3D Audio".
If your computer is hooked up to a 5.1 speaker system, you should go into
"Options" and turn onHardware 3D Audio" to take advantage of 360-degree 
sound panning, which rocks.
There also is a safe mode available in case you run into any audio 
related problems like glitches/ hitches/ static or bad performance if
sound is enabled.
3.3 Network play issues
The minimum speed connection for acceptable Internet play performance is
a 33.3K modem connection to your Internet Service Provider.
Known network play issues:
When a new player enters a network game, clients may experience a
1/4-second pause while the mesh, skin, and other data is loaded for
that player. This is by design.
Unreal Tournament 2004's Internet play performance is highly
dependent on the bandwidth of your connection, the latency (ping
time), and the packet loss.  The game is designed to be playable up
to 300 msec ping times, 5% packet loss, and 33.3K connection speeds.
Performance degrades heavily under worse latency, packet loss, and
bandwidth connections.
3.4 Control issues
Some PC keyboards can't recognize certain combinations of 3 or more
simultaneously pressed keys.
3.5 Direct3D
Please ensure that you are running the latest drivers for your graphics
card as Unreal Tournament 2004 stresses the hardware and drivers to a
greater extent than most available games and we rely on a number of
bug fixes hardware vendors incorporated into their latest drivers. To
obtain the latest drivers please visit the website of your graphics
card manufacturer.
3.6TNT2 / Kyro II / Voodoo 3 issues
Due to the lack of certain key functionality like texture compression and
cubemap support TNT2, Kyro II, Voodoo 3, G400,.. cards won't be able
to run the game at the full visual quality. As uncompressed textures are
much larger than the compressed ones we have to drastically scale down
both size and color depth of the textures in order to fit them into video
memory. This means you will notice banding artifacts especially in the 
menus. 
The lack of cubemap support means that reflections won't look correct 
though during gameplay you'll most likely be hard pressed to spot the 
difference.
3.7 OpenGL
The OpenGL renderer is not officially supported on Windows but could be 
a good choice on certain hardware driver combinations as it might 
trigger fewer bugs in drivers. Unless you are experiencing serious visual 
flaws there is no reason to change to the OpenGL renderer though. Unlike 
Unreal Tournament, Unreal Tournament 2004 was designed around D3D and 
offers the best performance and visual quality with the D3D renderer.
Also please keep in mind that the OpenGL renderer has higher system 
requirements than the D3D renderer. The OpenGL renderer is known to 
not work correctly with pre-7.76 ATI drivers.
3.8 Obtaining DirectX 9.0b
DirectX 9.0b will be included on the retail CD and be downloaded from
the below URL if it is not already installed on your system.
http://www.microsoft.com/windows/directx/default.aspx
3.9 Game is starting up windowed
If the game fails to obtain keyboard focus when launching it will start
up windowed. In this case you can click on the window and press ALT-ENTER
to switch to fullscreen mode.
3.10 Software rendering
You can have the game pick sensible default settings for software 
rendering by launching it with thesoftware command line argument. This
will also pick the software renderer as the render device which is 
useful if you run into driver issues or don't have a 3D accelerated 
graphics card.
ut2004 -software
4 Dedicated Network Servers
4.1 Explanation
For optimal network play performance, you can launch a dedicated copy of
the Unreal Tournament 2004 server on a computer. This improves performance
compared to using a non-dedicated server but, of course, since it ties up 
the PC.
Anybody may freely run dedicated servers on the Internet; you don't need
to get permission or fill out any paperwork.
4.2 Launching
You can launch a dedicated server by going through the regular Unreal
Tournament 2004 menu, selectHost Multiplayer Game Game & Map, setting
the appropriate options under theServer' tab, being sure to check
'Dedicated Server'. This is what you'll want to do for quick LAN games
where you have an extra machine sitting around that can act as a
dedicated server.
Alternatively, you can launch a dedicated server from the command line by
running ut2004.exe directlywhich usually resides in the
c:\UT2004-Demo\System directory, or the System subdirectory of
whatever other directory you installed the game in).For example, to
launch the levelDM-Rankin", run:
ucc server DM-Rankin.ut2
4.3 Multiple Servers Per Machine
Each copy of the dedicated server can serve one and only one level at a
time.
However, you can run multiple level servers on one machine. To do this,
you must give each server a unique TCP/IP port number. The default port
number is 7777. To specify a port, use the following type of command
line:
ucc server DM-Rankin.ut2 port=7778
5 Online Stats Tracking UT2004stats
5.1 Overview
Unreal Tournament 2004 has built in support for the freely available 
service UT2004stats. UT2004stats lets you track and display your scoring
and ranking and provides gameplay statistical analysis for your Internet 
games. 
For a detailed breakdown of your stats visit UT2004stats at:
http://ut2004stats.epicgames.com
5.2 Turning onyour* Stats Tracking
Go to the in-game Settings Network > UT2004 Global Stats menu. Turn 
on UT2004stats tracking by clicking theTrack Stats" button, and 
choose a unique Stats Username and Stats Password combination. This 
will assign a unique PlayerID handle to you.
Note: Your online UT2004stats areonly* as safe as you are with your 
password.
6 Useful Web Links
Visit for the latest updates, patches, and community events:
http://www.unrealtournament.com
Information about other Epic games:
http://www.epicgames.com
Information about other Digital Extremes games:
http://www.digitalextremes.com
Latest news from the Epic development team. Great resources for 
programmers, mod authors, and enthusiasts:
http://unreal.epicgames.com
Find out more about Atari Products:
http://www.atari.com
7 Copyright Notice
Karma Physics Library Copyright 2003 Criterion Software Limited. Karma is a
trademark of Criterion Software Limited, used under license.
Microsoft Speech Software Development Kit, Version 5.1 Copyright 2003
Microsoft. 
Ogg Vorbis Copyright 2001-2003, Xiph.Org Foundation
Speex Copyright 2002-2003, Jean-Marc Valin/ Xiph.Org Foundation
Uses Miles Sound System. Copyright C 1991-2003 by RAD Game Tools, Inc.
MPEG Layer-3 playback supplied with the Miles Sound System
from RAD Game Tools, Inc.MPEG Layer-3 audio compression technology
licensed by Fraunhofer IIS and THOMSON multimedia.
DivXR) Video provided by DivXNetworks, Inc. COPYRIGHT (C) 2000-2003.
"DivX is a registered trademark of DivXNetworks, Inc. in the USA and other
countries.
Simple DirectMedia Layer library is used under the terms of the LGPL
License. The LGPL License may be found on the CD.
Linux and Mac version of OpenAL are used under the terms of the LGPL
License. The LGPL License may be found on the CD.
BSDish Copyrightc) 2002 Jorge Acereda <jacereda@users.sourceforge.net> &
Peter O'Gorman ogorman@users.sourceforge.net
Unreal Tournament 20032004 Epic Games, Inc. Raleigh, N.C. USA. 
Unreal and the Unreal logo are registered trademarks of Epic 
Games, Inc. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 
All other trademarks and trade names are the property of their 
respective owners. 
Unreal Tournament 2004 was created by Digital Extremes and Epic Games,
Inc.. 
Manufactured and marketed by Infogrames, Inc., New York, New York, 
a subsidiary of Infogrames Entertainment, S.A., under license from 
Epic Games, Inc.
